---
# Please do not edit this file directly; it is auto generated.
# Instead, please edit 05-creating-object.md in _episodes_rmd/
source: Rmd
title: "Creating objects in R"
teaching: 30
exercises: 10
questions:
- "How do I create objects in R?"
objectives:
- "Define the following terms as they relate to R: object, assign, call, function, arguments, options."
- "Create objects and assign values to them  in R."
- "Learn how to _name_ objects."
keypoints:
- ""
- ""
---



## Creating objects in R

You can get output from R simply by typing math in the console:


~~~
3 + 5
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
[1] 8
~~~
{: .output}



~~~
12 / 7
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
[1] 1.714286
~~~
{: .output}

However, to do useful and interesting things, we need to assign _values_ to
_objects_. To create an object, we need to give it a name followed by the
assignment operator `<-`, and the value we want to give it:


~~~
weight_kg <- 55
~~~
{: .language-r}

`<-` is the assignment operator. It assigns values on the right to objects on
the left. So, after executing `x <- 3`, the value of `x` is `3`. The arrow also looks like a mouth (with tongue), which makes it easy to pronounce as `x` **eats** 3.  For historical reasons, you can also use `=`
for assignments, but not in every context. Because of the
[slight](https://blog.revolutionanalytics.com/2008/12/use-equals-or-arrow-for-assignment.html)
[differences](https://r.789695.n4.nabble.com/Is-there-any-difference-between-and-tp878594p878598.html)
in syntax, it is good practice to always use `<-` for assignments.

In RStudio, typing <kbd>Alt</kbd> + <kbd>-</kbd> (push <kbd>Alt</kbd> at the
same time as the <kbd>-</kbd> key) will write ` <- ` in a single keystroke in a PC, while typing <kbd>Option</kbd> + <kbd>-</kbd> (push <kbd>Option</kbd> at the
same time as the <kbd>-</kbd> key) does the same in a Mac.

Objects can be given almost any name such as `x`, `current_temperature`, or `subject_id`. Here are some further guidelines on naming objects:

* You want your object names to be explicit and not too long.
* They cannot start with a number (`2x` is not valid, but `x2` is).
* R is case sensitive, so for example, `weight_kg` is different from `Weight_kg`.
* There are some names that cannot be used because they are the names of fundamental functions in R (e.g., `if`, `else`, `for`, see
[here](https://stat.ethz.ch/R-manual/R-devel/library/base/html/Reserved.html)
for a complete list). In general, even if it's allowed, it's best to not use
other function names (e.g., `c`, `T`, `mean`, `data`, `df`, `weights`). If in
doubt, check the help to see if the name is already in use. 
* It's best to avoid dots (`.`) within names. Many function names in R itself have them and dots also have a special meaning (methods) in R and other programming languages. To avoid confusion, don't include dots in names.
* It is recommended to use nouns for object names and verbs for function names.
* Be consistent in the styling of your code, such as where you put spaces, how you name objects, etc. Styles can include "lower_snake", "UPPER_SNAKE", "lowerCamelCase", "UpperCamelCase", etc. Using a consistent coding style makes your code clearer to read for your future self and your collaborators. In R, three popular style guides come from [Google](https://google.github.io/styleguide/Rguide.xml), [Jean
Fan](https://jef.works/R-style-guide/) and the
[tidyverse](https://style.tidyverse.org/). The tidyverse style is very comprehensive and may seem overwhelming at first. You can install the [**`lintr`**](https://github.com/jimhester/lintr) package to automatically check for issues in the styling of your code.

>
> ## Objects vs. variables
>
> What are known as `objects` in `R` are known as `variables` in many other
> programming languages. Depending on the context, `object` and `variable` can
> have drastically different meanings. However, in this lesson, the two words
> are used synonymously. For more information see:
> https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/R-lang.html#Objects
{: .callout}


When assigning a value to an object, R does not print anything. You can force R to print the value by using parentheses or by typing the object name:


~~~
weight_kg <- 55    # doesn't print anything
(weight_kg <- 55)  # but putting parenthesis around the call prints the value of `weight_kg`
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
[1] 55
~~~
{: .output}



~~~
weight_kg          # and so does typing the name of the object
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
[1] 55
~~~
{: .output}

Now that R has `weight_kg` in memory, we can do arithmetic with it. For
instance, we may want to convert this weight into pounds (weight in pounds is 2.2 times the weight in kg):


~~~
2.2 * weight_kg
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
[1] 121
~~~
{: .output}

We can also change an object's value by assigning it a new one:


~~~
weight_kg <- 57.5
2.2 * weight_kg
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
[1] 126.5
~~~
{: .output}

This means that assigning a value to one object does not change the values of
other objects. For example, let's store the animal's weight in pounds in a new
object, `weight_lb`:


~~~
weight_lb <- 2.2 * weight_kg
~~~
{: .language-r}

and then change `weight_kg` to 100.


~~~
weight_kg <- 100
~~~
{: .language-r}

What do you think is the current content of the object `weight_lb`? 126.5 or 220?

### Saving your code

Up to now, your code has been in the console. This is useful for quick queries
but not so helpful if you want to revisit your work for any reason.
A script can be opened by pressing <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + 
<kbd>N</kbd>. 
It is wise to save your script file immediately. To do this press 
<kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>S</kbd>. This will open a dialogue box where you 
can decide where to save your script file, and what to name it.
The `.R` file extension is added automatically and ensures your file
will open with RStudio.

Don't forget to save your work periodically by pressing <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + 
<kbd>S</kbd>.


### Comments

The comment character in R is `#`, anything to the right of a `#` in a script
will be ignored by R. It is useful to leave notes and explanations in your
scripts.
RStudio makes it easy to comment or uncomment a paragraph: after selecting the
lines you  want to comment, press at the same time on your keyboard
<kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>C</kbd>. If you only want to comment
out one line, you can put the cursor at any location of that line (i.e. no need 
to select the whole line), then press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + 
<kbd>C</kbd>.

>
> ## Exercise
>
> What are the values after each statement in the following?
>
> 
> ~~~
> mass <- 47.5            # mass?
> age  <- 122             # age?
> mass <- mass * 2.0      # mass?
> age  <- age - 20        # age?
> mass_index <- mass/age  # mass_index?
> ~~~
> {: .language-r}
> > ## Solution
> >
> > 1. mass equals 47.5  
> > 2. age equals 122  
> > 3. mass equals 95.0  
> > 4. age equals 102
> > mass_index equals 0.9313725
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

### Functions and their arguments

Functions are "canned scripts" that automate more complicated sets of commands
including operations assignments, etc. Many functions are predefined, or can be
made available by importing R *packages* (more on that later). A function
usually takes one or more inputs called *arguments*. Functions often (but not
always) return a *value*. A typical example would be the function `sqrt()`. The
input (the argument) must be a number, and the return value (in fact, the
output) is the square root of that number. Executing a function ('running it')
is called *calling* the function. An example of a function call is:


~~~
weight_kg <- sqrt(10)
~~~
{: .language-r}

Here, the value of 10 is given to the `sqrt()` function, the `sqrt()` function
calculates the square root, and returns the value which is then assigned to
the object `weight_kg`. This function is very simple, because it takes just one argument.

The return 'value' of a function need not be numerical (like that of `sqrt()`),
and it also does not need to be a single item: it can be a set of things, or
even a dataset. We'll see that when we read data files into R.

Arguments can be anything, not only numbers or filenames, but also other
objects. Exactly what each argument means differs per function, and must be
looked up in the documentation (see below). Some functions take arguments which
may either be specified by the user, or, if left out, take on a *default* value:
these are called *options*. Options are typically used to alter the way the
function operates, such as whether it ignores 'bad values', or what symbol to
use in a plot.  However, if you want something specific, you can specify a value
of your choice which will be used instead of the default.

Let's try a function that can take multiple arguments: `round()`.


~~~
round(3.14159)
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
[1] 3
~~~
{: .output}

Here, we've called `round()` with just one argument, `3.14159`, and it has
returned the value `3`.  That's because the default is to round to the nearest
whole number. If we want more digits we can see how to do that by getting
information about the `round` function.  We can use `args(round)` to find what 
arguments it takes, or look at the
help for this function using `?round`.


~~~
args(round)
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
function (x, digits = 0) 
NULL
~~~
{: .output}


~~~
?round
~~~
{: .language-r}

We see that if we want a different number of digits, we can
type `digits = 2` or however many we want.


~~~
round(3.14159, digits = 2)
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
[1] 3.14
~~~
{: .output}

If you provide the arguments in the exact same order as they are defined you
don't have to name them:


~~~
round(3.14159, 2)
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
[1] 3.14
~~~
{: .output}

And if you do name the arguments, you can switch their order:


~~~
round(digits = 2, x = 3.14159)
~~~
{: .language-r}



~~~
[1] 3.14
~~~
{: .output}

It's good practice to put the non-optional arguments (like the number you're
rounding) first in your function call, and to then specify the names of all optional
arguments.  If you don't, someone reading your code might have to look up the
definition of a function with unfamiliar arguments to understand what you're
doing.
