---
# Please do not edit this file directly; it is auto generated.
# Instead, please edit 06-vectors-data-types.md in _episodes_rmd/
source: Rmd
title: "Vectors and data types"
teaching: 0
exercises: 0
questions:
- "What are data types in R?"
objectives:
- "Describe four data types in R."
keypoints:
- ""
- ""
---
 
## Vectors and data types



A vector is the most common and basic data type in R, and is pretty much
the workhorse of R. A vector is composed by a series of values, which can be
either numbers or characters. We can assign a series of values to a vector using
the `c()` function. For example we can create a vector of animal weights and assign
it to a new object `weight_g`:


```r
weight_g <- c(50, 60, 65, 82)
weight_g
```

```
## [1] 50 60 65 82
```

A vector can also contain characters:


```r
animals <- c("mouse", "rat", "dog")
animals
```

```
## [1] "mouse" "rat"   "dog"
```

The quotes around "mouse", "rat", etc. are essential here. Without the quotes R
will assume objects have been created called `mouse`, `rat` and `dog`. As these objects
don't exist in R's memory, there will be an error message.

There are many functions that allow you to inspect the content of a
vector. `length()` tells you how many elements are in a particular vector:


```r
length(weight_g)
```

```
## [1] 4
```

```r
length(animals)
```

```
## [1] 3
```

An important feature of a vector, is that all of the elements are the same type of data.
The function `class()` indicates what kind of object you are working with:


```r
class(weight_g)
```

```
## [1] "numeric"
```

```r
class(animals)
```

```
## [1] "character"
```

The function `str()` provides an overview of the structure of an object and its
elements. It is a useful function when working with large and complex
objects:


```r
str(weight_g)
```

```
##  num [1:4] 50 60 65 82
```

```r
str(animals)
```

```
##  chr [1:3] "mouse" "rat" "dog"
```

You can use the `c()` function to add other elements to your vector:

```r
weight_g <- c(weight_g, 90) # add to the end of the vector
weight_g <- c(30, weight_g) # add to the beginning of the vector
weight_g
```

```
## [1] 30 50 60 65 82 90
```

In the first line, we take the original vector `weight_g`,
add the value `90` to the end of it, and save the result back into
`weight_g`. Then we add the value `30` to the beginning, again saving the result
back into `weight_g`.

We can do this over and over again to grow a vector, or assemble a dataset.
As we program, this may be useful to add results that we are collecting or
calculating.

An **atomic vector** is the simplest R **data type** and is a linear vector of a single type. Above, we saw 
2 of the 6 main **atomic vector** types  that R
uses: `"character"` and `"numeric"` (or `"double"`). These are the basic building blocks that
all R objects are built from. The other 4 **atomic vector** types are:

* `"logical"` for `TRUE` and `FALSE` (the boolean data type)
* `"integer"` for integer numbers (e.g., `2L`, the `L` indicates to R that it's an integer)
* `"complex"` to represent complex numbers with real and imaginary parts (e.g.,
  `1 + 4i`) and that's all we're going to say about them
* `"raw"` for bitstreams that we won't discuss further

You can check the type of your vector using the `typeof()` function and inputting your vector as the argument.

Vectors are one of the many **data structures** that R uses. Other important
ones are lists (`list`), matrices (`matrix`), data frames (`data.frame`),
factors (`factor`) and arrays (`array`).


> ### Challenge
>
>
> * We’ve seen that atomic vectors can be of type character,
>   numeric (or double), integer, and logical. But what happens if we try to mix these types in
>   a single vector?
> 
> 
>
> * What will happen in each of these examples? (hint: use `class()`
>   to check the data type of your objects):
>
>     ```r
>     num_char <- c(1, 2, 3, "a")
>     num_logical <- c(1, 2, 3, TRUE)
>     char_logical <- c("a", "b", "c", TRUE)
>     tricky <- c(1, 2, 3, "4")
>     ```
>
> * Why do you think it happens?
>
> 
>
> * How many values in `combined_logical` are `"TRUE"` (as a character) in the
>   following example (reusing the 2 `..._logical`s from above):
>
>     ```r
>     combined_logical <- c(num_logical, char_logical)
>     ```
>
> 
>
> * You've probably noticed that objects of different types get
>   converted into a single, shared type within a vector. In R, we
>   call converting objects from one class into another class
>   _coercion_. These conversions happen according to a hierarchy,
>   whereby some types get preferentially coerced into other
>   types. Can you draw a diagram that represents the hierarchy of how
>   these data types are coerced?
>
> 


